.TH CALCCU 1 "June 2026" "calccu 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
calccu \- live terminal calculator with variables, functions, units, and equation solving
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B calccu
.br
.B calccu
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ expression ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B calccu
is an interactive terminal calculator. It shows a bounded live preview while
input is edited, evaluates expressions with Enter, stores the latest result in
.BR ans ,
and keeps a short visible session history above the prompt.
.PP
Automatic answers are displayed as values. Named assignments and equation
solutions keep their names.
.PP
When an expression is passed on the command line,
.B calccu
evaluates it and exits. When standard input is not a terminal,
.B calccu
evaluates each non-empty input line and exits.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show help text and exit.
.TP
.BR -v ", " --version
Show version information and exit.
.TP
.BI "--precision " n
Set displayed significant digits for this run. The value must be between 1 and
15.
.TP
.B --plain
Print display-form output. Automatic answers are values; named assignments and
equation solutions are printed unchanged.
.TP
.B --json
Print one JSON object per evaluated expression. This applies to command-line
expressions and standard input batches.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Start interactive mode:
.EX
calccu
.EE
.TP
Evaluate one expression:
.EX
calccu "2 + 2"
.EE
Set precision for one run:
.EX
calccu --precision 6 "1 / 3"
.EE
.TP
Print JSON:
.EX
calccu --json "5km -> m"
.EE
.TP
Convert units:
.EX
calccu "5km to m"
calccu "5km -> m"
calccu "2 meters to cm"
calccu "32F -> C"
.EE
.TP
Solve equations:
.EX
calccu "2x = 3"
calccu "x^2 - 4 = 0"
.EE
.TP
Use built-in math functions:
.EX
calccu "gcd(12, 18)"
calccu "lcm(4, 6)"
calccu "fact(5)"
.EE
.TP
Read expressions from standard input:
.EX
printf "2 + 2\\n32F to C\\n" | calccu
.EE
.SH INTERACTIVE COMMANDS
.TP
.B help
Show help.
.TP
.B ?
Show help.
.TP
.B clear
Clear visible calculator history.
.TP
.B cls
Clear visible calculator history.
.TP
.B clear history
Clear visible calculator history.
.TP
.B quit
Quit interactive mode.
.TP
.B exit
Quit interactive mode.
.TP
.B vars
List variables.
.TP
.B funcs
List functions.
.TP
.B ls vars
List variables.
.TP
.B ls funcs
List functions.
.TP
.B ls units
Show supported conversion units.
.TP
.B list units
Show supported conversion units.
.TP
.B history
Show recent commands.
.TP
.B units
Show supported conversion units.
.TP
.B copy
Show the current
.B ans
value.
.TP
.B copy ans
Show the current
.B ans
value.
.TP
.B precision
Show displayed significant digits.
.TP
.BI "precision " n
Set displayed significant digits.
.TP
.BI "del " name
Delete a variable or function.
.TP
.BI "delete " name
Delete a variable or function.
.TP
.BI "del var " name
Delete a variable.
.TP
.BI "del fn " name
Delete a function.
.TP
.BI "del func " name
Delete a function.
.SH KEYS
.TP
.B Enter
Commit the current input.
.TP
.B Ctrl+C
Quit.
.TP
.B Ctrl+L
Clear visible calculator history.
.TP
.B Left/Right
Move the cursor.
.TP
.B Up/Down
Recall previous or next command.
.TP
.B PageUp/PageDown
Scroll visible-session results.
.TP
.B Home/End
Move to start or end.
.TP
.B Ctrl+A/Ctrl+E
Move to start or end.
.TP
.B Ctrl+U/Ctrl+K
Delete before or after the cursor.
.TP
.B Ctrl+W
Delete the previous word.
.SH MATH
.B calccu
supports the operators
.BR + ,
.BR - ,
.BR * ,
.BR / ,
and
.BR ^ ,
parentheses, implicit multiplication such as
.BR 2x ,
variables, user-defined functions, unit conversion with
.BR to ,
the constants
.B pi
and
.BR e ,
and the latest result variable
.BR ans .
.PP
Basic finite decimal and integer arithmetic is kept exact, avoiding common
floating-point artifacts such as
.BR "0.1 + 0.2" .
.B gcd ,
.B lcm ,
and
.B fact
also use exact integer arithmetic.
Built-in transcendental functions and unit conversion factors use JavaScript
numbers where approximation is expected.
.PP
Built-in functions include
.BR abs ,
.BR acos ,
.BR asin ,
.BR atan ,
.BR cbrt ,
.BR ceil ,
.BR cos ,
.BR exp ,
.BR fact ,
.BR factorial ,
.BR floor ,
.BR gcd ,
.BR hypot ,
.BR lcm ,
.BR ln ,
.BR log ,
.BR log2 ,
.BR max ,
.BR min ,
.BR round ,
.BR sign ,
.BR sin ,
.BR sqrt ,
.BR tan ,
and
.BR trunc .
.PP
Common aliases and plural names are accepted for many units, such as
.BR meter ,
.BR metres ,
.BR feet ,
.BR hours ,
and
.BR bytes .
Unknown unit-like names include suggestions when there is a close match.
.PP
Equation solving supports exact single-variable linear equations and quadratic
equations up to degree two.
.SH UNITS
Supported unit categories are temperature, length, weight, area, volume,
energy, speed, time, and data.
.PP
Canonical output uses short unit symbols such as
.BR m ,
.BR ft ,
.BR h ,
and
.BR B .
.PP
Use the
.B units
interactive command to list all supported unit symbols.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CALCCU_HISTORY
Path to the interactive command history file. Overrides the XDG default.
.TP
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
Base directory for the default interactive command history file. Defaults to
.BR ~/.local/state .
.SH FILES
.TP
.B $XDG_STATE_HOME/calccu/history
Default interactive command history file.
.TP
.B ~/.local/state/calccu/history
Default interactive command history file when
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
is unset.
.SH LICENSE
MIT.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR node (1)
